--- 
layout: single
title: A quick look at the public ICEWS data 
date: 2015-04-08 12:11:08.000000000 +03:00 
categories:
- post
tags: 
- event data 
- icews
---

The ICEWS data, including the underlying raw event data as well as some
aggregations, were quietly [posted on
Dataverse](http://thedata.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/icews) the Friday before last.
I've worked with the ICEWS data for several years now, first when I was
working on on the ICEWS package--we deliver updated monthly forecasts for the
ICEWS events of interest (EOIs) once a month--and more recently for the
[irregular leadership change forecasting
project](http://andybeger.com/2014/05/23/the-thailand-coup-and-some-recent-
forecasting-work/). The public data are formatted differently from the data
I've worked with, so most of the code I have lying around is not that useful,
but in going through the public data I did recreate a short overview that is
nowhere near as complete as [David Masad](http://www.davidmasad.com)'s [first
look](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/gist/dmasad/f79ce5abfd4fb61d253b) (using
Python), and some code that might be useful for getting started in R.

One of the nice things about the public release of these data, aside from the
hope that they will start to [get used in
modeling](http://predictiveheuristics.com/2014/10/06/the-right-kind-of-
variance/) ([repost](http://andybeger.com/2014/10/06/the-right-kind-of-
variance/)), is that it is very interesting to read new takes by people whose
perspectives are different than mine, like, so far:

  - [Overview and descriptives](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/gist/dmasad/f79ce5abfd4fb61d253b) by David Masad
  - Jay Ulfelder's notes on [using ICEWS in country-month modeling](https://dartthrowingchimp.wordpress.com/2015/04/03/down-the-country-month-rabbit-hole/), including some starter R code.
  - Phil Schrodt's [comments on the public release](https://asecondmouse.wordpress.com/2015/03/30/seven-observations-on-the-newly-released-icews-data/), from an event data producer's perspective.

Now to the quick overview, using R rather than Python (link to code at end).
The first figure below shows the daily event totals, as well as a 30-day
moving average. The daily totals increase from around 500 in 1996 to a steady
level of around 3,000 from 2005 on, before decreasing again around 2009/2010.
As others have pointed out, this stability is a good feature to have since it
makes it plausible to model without some kind of normalization to account for
changes in the underlying event volume. This is in contrast to GDELT, where
the story corpus and event counts increase dramatically over time.

[![Daily totals in the ICEWS event data]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/icews-daily.png)]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/icews-daily.png)

The plot shows the daily event totals as points rather than with a line plot
mainly because I also wanted to add a moving average to bring out the
underlying trend more clearly. This shows an interesting pattern that I didn't
see with a line plot, namely that the daily event totals seem to be bimodal.
There appear to be two kinds of days: those with relatively few events, about
1,500 during the 2000's, those with more events, with 2,500 to 3,000 events
per day, and few days that fall in between. ~~I have no idea why that is,
but for that matter also no idea whether this shows up with any other machine-
coded event data.~~ It turns out that on weekends there are only about
half the amount of stories, and hence events, compared to weekdays (thanks to
the [ICEWS team for clarifying
this](https://twitter.com/icews/status/585788549221482496)). Talk about a
reminder of how important media bias and coverage are for event data.

The second plot maps events per capita by country, using the full range of the
data from 1995 to 2014. I used 2013 population data from the World Bank World
Development Indicators (WDI) to scale the event totals with. Bluish colors
indicate below average events per capita, and red higher than average events
per capita. The raw rates range from 600 on the low end, with countries like
Madagascar, Niger, and Cameroon, and up to 64,000 on the high end for Georgia,
Israel, Cyprus, and Lebanon. The rates are very skewed, and note that the map
shows log10 of the rate.

[![Total ICEWS events per capita, using 2013 WDI population figures.]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/icews-map.png)]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/icews-map.png)

I also did some hasty linear regressions models (see the linked code below) of
the logged country totals using a couple of variables from WDI. The moments
where you can use linear regression in conflict research are rare and so
refreshing, I couldn't resist. Population and GDP both have a positive impact
on event totals, and a model with only those two variables has an adjusted R2
of about 0.8. That's good. Neither area nor broadband internet subscribers nor
cell subscribers had significant coefficients and they did not help model fit.
Cases like Israel and Georgia have large residuals, so maybe adding some kind
of conflict indicator would help. But I think this is starting to touch on the
much larger issue of media coverage and bias (again), so I'll just leave with
this:

[![Distribution of ICEWS events per million by country]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/events-pcap-hist.png)]({{ site.url }}/content/2015/events-pcap-hist.png)

## Code

R code to:

  - [Summarize the data](https://github.com/andybega/mireg-blogs/tree/master/icews-public), including the images in this post.
  - [Load event data to SQLite](https://github.com/andybega/mireg-blogs/blob/master/icews-public/icews-to-sql.r), with some example queries.




